>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 18: THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION TRIES TO
REASSURE EUROPEAN ALLIES; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE FIGHT
OVER WHO CONTROLS PUBLIC LANDS
IN WESTERN STATES.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP IS
RALLYING SUPPORTERS TO GET
BEHIND HIS AGENDA.
HE SPOKE FOR 45 MINUTES AT A
CAMPAIGN-STYLE EVENT THIS
EVENING IN MELBOURNE, FLORIDA, A
SHORT HOP FROM HIS WEEKEND
RETREAT IN PALM BEACH.
THE PRESIDENT SAID HE "WANTED TO
BE AMONG FRIENDS AND AMONG THE
PEOPLE."
BEFORE THE RALLY, A WHITE HOUSE
SPOKESWOMAN NOTED MR. TRUMP
WANTED TO SPEAK DIRECTLY TO THE
COUNTRY, "UNFILTERED."
THE PRESIDENT TOLD THE CROWD HIS
PLANS FOR THE FUTURE ARE "BIG
AND BOLD," INCLUDING A $1
TRILLION INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN,
REPLACING OBAMACARE, REDUCING
GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS AND TAX
REFORM.
>> YOU WANT LOWER TAXES, LESS
REGULATION, MILLIONS OF NEW
JOBS, AND MORE PRODUCTS STAMPED
WITH THOSE BEAUTIFUL, BEAUTIFUL
WORDS, "MADE IN THE U.S.A."
YOU WANT TO MAKE IT EASIER FOR
COMPANIES TO DO BUSINESS IN
AMERICA, AND HARDER FOR
COMPANIES TO LEAVE.
WE DON'T WANT COMPANIES SAYING,
"EVERYBODY'S FIRED.
WE'RE MOVING TO ANOTHER COUNTRY.
WE'RE GOING TO MAKE THE PRODUCT,
SELL IT ACROSS THE BORDER, AND
ISN'T THAT WONDERFUL?"
NOT GOING TO HAPPEN ANYMORE.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE STRONG
BORDERS.
AND WHEN THEY WANT TO SELL THAT
PRODUCT BACK ACROSS OUR BORDER,
THEY'RE GOING TO PAY A 35% TAX.
AND YOU KNOW WHAT?
THEY'RE NEVER GOING TO LEAVE!
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER TODAY,
VICE PRESIDENT PENCE CARRIED THE
ADMINISTRATION'S MESSAGE TO
EUROPE.
ATTENDING AN ANNUAL SECURITY
CONFERENCE IN MUNICH, GERMANY,
TODAY, VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE
SAID THE U.S. HAS AN
"UNWAVERING" COMMITMENT TO THE
27 OTHER NATIONS WHO FORM THE
POST-WORLD WAR II NATO
ALLIANCE, WHOSE MOTTO IS "AN
ATTACK ON ONE IS AN ATTACK ON
ALL."
>> WE WILL STAND WITH EUROPE
TODAY AND EVERY DAY BECAUSE WE
ARE BOUND TOGETHER BY THE SAME
NOBLE IDEALS: FREEDOM,
DEMOCRACY, JUSTICE AND THE RULE
OF LAW.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT PENCE
BLUNTLY TOLD ALLIES THEY'RE
FALLING SHORT OF NATO GUIDELINES
TO SPEND AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO 2%
OF THEIR GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
ON THEIR MILITARY.
IN FACT, ACCORDING TO NATO'S OWN
FIGURES, ONLY THE U.S. AND FOUR
OTHER NATO MEMBERS MEET THAT
GOAL, WHILE FRANCE, GERMANY, THE
NETHERLANDS AND ITALY ARE AMONG
NATIONS THAT SPEND LESS.
>> NOW, LET ME BE CLEAR ON THIS
POINT: THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES EXPECTS OUR
ALLIES TO KEEP THEIR WORD TO
FULFILL THIS COMMITMENT.
AND FOR MOST, THAT MEANS THE
TIME HAS COME TO DO MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: GERMAN
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL, WHO
SPOKE BEFORE PENCE, SAID GERMANY
IS INCREASING ITS MILITARY
BUDGET.
>> (translated): THE GOAL OF
2%, I AM ABLE TO SAY HERE, SAME
AS THE DEFENSE MINISTERS, WE
WILL DO EVERYTHING POSSIBLE.
WE FEEL OBLIGATED TO THIS GOAL.
>> Sreenivasan: PENCE ALSO TOLD
THE GATHERING RUSSIA MUST HONOR
THE 2015 AGREEMENT TO END
FIGHTING IN EASTERN UKRAINE
BETWEEN GOVERNMENT FORCES AND
RUSSIA-BACKED SEPARATISTS, AND
RUSSIA'S FOREIGN MINISTER
RESPONDED:
>> THE UNITED STATES WILL
CONTINUE TO HOLD RUSSIA
ACCOUNTABLE, EVEN AS WE SEARCH
FOR NEW COMMON GROUND, WHICH, AS
YOU KNOW, PRESIDENT TRUMP
BELIEVES CAN BE FOUND.
>> (translated): WE COUNT ON
COMMON SENSE PREVAILING.
WHAT KIND OF RELATIONS DO WE
WANT WITH THE UNITED STATES?
PRAGMATIC RELATIONS, MUTUAL
RESPECT, UNDERSTANDING OF THE
INCREASED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
GLOBAL STABILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE
PERSPECTIVE ON THE U.S./RUSSIA
RELATIONSHIP AND THE ROLE OF
NATO, I AM JOINED FROM MUNICH BY
JAMES JEFFREY, WHO HAS SERVED IN
REPUBLICAN AND DEMOCRATIC
ADMINISTRATIONS AS U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO TURKEY AND IRAQ,
AND AS DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISER.
HE'S NOW WITH THE WASHINGTON
INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY.
SO, AMBASSADOR JEFFREY, WHY ARE
EUROPEAN LEADERS UNSETTLED WITH
PRESIDENT TRUMP?
WHY WERE TODAY'S REASSURANCES
NECESSARY?
>> THEY WERE NECESSARY BECAUSE
OF THINGS THAT THE PRESIDENT
SAID DURING THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST
NATO, POSSIBLY FORMING SOME SORT
OF ALLIANCE WITH THE RUSSIANS,
AND BASICALLY CALLING INTO
QUESTION THE VALIDITY OF
UNDERLYING VALUES THAT EVERYBODY
WE SAY IN THE WEST, THE ATLANTIC
COMMUNITY, SHARES.
THIS MADE PEOPLE VERY NERVOUS
BECAUSE HERE IN EUROPE, THIS IS
LIKE A CIVIC RELIGION FOR THE
POLITICAL CLASS AND MUCH OF THE
POPULATION, AND IT'S THE
ANECDOTE TO HALF A CENTURY OF
DEVASTATING WAR AND TOTALITARIAN
REGIMES THAT THEY EXPERIENCED
IN THE EARLY 20th CENTURY.
SO THEY WERE REALLY FRIGHTENED
WHEN THEY HEARD THIS, AND THAT'S
WHY THE EFFORT OVER THE WEEKEND
TO CLEAR THINGS UP WITH
WASHINGTON.
>> Sreenivasan: DO THEY
BELIEVE THAT WHAT VICE PRESIDENT
PENCE HAS SAID, OR DEFENSE
SECRETARY MATTIS HAS SAID, IS
THE LAST WORD, THAT THEY CAN
TRUST THAT THAT'S THE U.S.
FOREIGN POLICY?
>> THE EUROPEANS WILL NEVER BE
COMPLETELY SATISFIED OR
COMPLETELY REASSURED EVER WITH
AMERICA, AND PARTICULARLY NOW
BECAUSE DONALD TRUMP IS SUCH A
DIFFERENT PRESIDENT AND SUCH A
PROBLEMATIC PRESIDENT FOR
EUROPEANS.
BUT IF THE PRESIDENT WANTS TO
POINT TO A WELL-OILED ELEMENT OF
HIS ADMINISTRATION MACHINE, IT'S
THE EFFORTS BY VICE PRESIDENT
PENCE, SECRETARY TILLERSON,
SECRETARY KELLY, SECRETARY
MATTIS HERE IN GERMANY OVER THE
WEEKEND.
THEY HIT EVERY WORRY THAT THE
EUROPEANS HAD, AND THEY GAVE ALL
KINDS OF ASSURANCES, NOT COMING
FROM THEM, BUT PARTICULARLY THE
VICE PRESIDENT SAID AGAIN AND
AGAIN, "THIS IS WHAT DONALD
TRUMP BELIEVES, THAT NATO IS
REALLY IMPORTANT, THAT RUSSIA
WILL HAVE TO ACCOUNT FOR ITS
ACTIONS IN UKRAINE AND
ELSEWHERE."
THIS IS EXACTLY WHAT THEY WANTED
TO HEAR.
WE'LL SEE WHETHER THEY BELIEVE
IT.
>> Sreenivasan: EUROPE IS ALSO
AT A CROSSROADS RIGHT NOW.
WE ALL REMEMBER THAT THE UNITED
KINGDOM DECIDED TO DEPART THE
E.U., THE BREXIT EVENT.
WE'VE GOT A RISE OF THE FAR
RIGHT.
WE'VE GOT HAVE SEVERAL IMPORTANT
ELECTIONS COMING UP.
AND THEN THERE'S ALSO THIS-- I
THINK THIS TONE THAT PERHAPS THE
UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA WILL BE
MORE CLOSELY ALLIED, WHICH
CHANGES THE BALANCE OF POWER
THERE.
>> IT STARTED WITH THE GREAT
ECONOMIC CRASH OF 2008, WHICH
IRONICALLY HURT EUROPE FAR MORE
THAN IT DID THE UNITED STATES,
AND THEY HAVE NOT YET RECOVERED.
COMBINED WITH THAT IS THIS HUGE
REFUGEE FLOW FROM THE MIDDLE
EAST AND THE SET OF TERRORIST
ATTACKS AGAINST GERMANY, AGAINST
FRANCE, AGAINST BELGIUM.
THIS HAS THEM UNSETTLED,
NERVOUS.
THEY'RE QUESTIONING THEIR
FUTURE.
BREXIT, THE BRITISH DECISION TO
LEAVE, WAS A TERRIBLE BLOW.
AND SO, ON TOP OF THIS, THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION, THEY WERE
REALLY RATTLED.
THEY'RE LESS RATTLED NOW, AND
THAT'S A GOOD THING.
>> Sreenivasan: SPEAKING OF
THE REFUGEE SITUATION, PRESIDENT
TRUMP HAS BEEN VERY CRITICAL OF
GERMANY'S POLICY.
HE CALLS IT AN OPEN DOOR POLICY,
AND HE IN RESPONSE HAS A TRAVEL
BAN FOR THE UNITED STATES.
NOW, THERE ARE SOME PLANS THE
TRAVEL BAN WILL COME BACK IN A
DIFFERENT FORM TO ADDRESS SOME
OF THE CONCERNS OF 9th
CIRCUIT.
HOW IS THAT SITTING WITH THE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITY?
>> THERE ARE MANY, MANY PEOPLE
IN EUROPE WHO THINK EXACTLY THE
WAY DONALD TRUMP THINKS ABOUT
ANGELA MERKEL'S DECISION TO LET
IN A MILLION REFUGEES, IN MANY
CASES WITHOUT ANY SCREENING
WHATSOEVER.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT THE
INITIAL TRAVEL BAN THAT THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT IMPOSED WAS A WISE
THING.
THERE'S NOTHING MERKEL CAN DO TO
REALLY REVERSE THE DAMAGE SHE
HAS DONE TO HER PARTY, TO HER
REPUTATION, AND TO EUROPEAN
SOLIDARITY WITH THAT DECISION.
IN A WAY, DONALD TRUMP IS JUST
SAYING WHAT MANY PEOPLE HERE
BELIEVE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
AMBASSADOR JAMES JEFFREY FROM
THE WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR
NEAR EAST POLICY, JOINING US
FROM GERMANY TONIGHT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: A POWERFUL
PACIFIC STORM IS BLASTING
CALIFORNIA THIS WEEKEND WITH ITS
HEAVIEST RAINFALL IN SIX YEARS.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
FORECAST A TOTAL OF TEN INCHES
OF RAIN IN PARTS OF SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA.
UTILITY CREWS TODAY WORKED TO
RESTORE POWER TO 78,000 HOMES IN
LOS ANGELES.
ONE MAN WAS ELECTROCUTED BY A
DOWNED WIRE.
20 MILES EAST OF L.A., 180 HOMES
WERE TOLD TO EVACUATE BECAUSE OF
POTENTIAL MUDSLIDES.
IN VICTORVILLE, FLASH FLOODS
WASHED AWAY CARS, AND ONE MAN
DROWNED IN HIS SUBMERGED
VEHICLE.
NEAR SHERMAN OAKS, A SINKHOLE
SWALLOWED UP TWO CARS.
MORE THAN 300 FLIGHTS WERE
DELAYED OR CANCELED AT LOS
ANGELES INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT,
AND AMTRAK CANCELED SERVICE
ALONG THE STATE'S SOUTHERN AND
CENTRAL COAST.
ONE OF THE MOST NOTORIOUS
TERRORISTS EVER CONVICTED IN THE
UNITED STATES, AND SERVING A
LIFE SENTENCE IN PRISON, HAS
DIED.
THE BUREAU OF PRISONS ANNOUNCED
TODAY THAT THE MUSLIM SHEIK,
OMAR ABDEL-RAHMAN, OF EGYPT,
DIED AT A PRISON HOSPITAL IN
NORTH CAROLINA.
HE HAD DIABETES AND CORONARY
ARTERY DISEASE.
KNOWN AS "THE BLIND SHEIKH,"
ABDEL-RAHMAN WAS CONVICTED IN
MANHATTAN FEDERAL COURT IN 1995
FOR THE CONSPIRACY BEHIND THE
1993 WORLD TRADE CENTER TRUCK
BOMBING.
THAT FIRST RADICAL ISLAMIC
TERRORIST ATTACK ON U.S. SOIL
KILLED SIX PEOPLE, INJURED
HUNDREDS MORE, AND CAUSED $800
MILLION IN PROPERTY DAMAGE.
THE TERROR CONSPIRACY INCLUDED A
SUBSEQUENT FOILED PLOT TO BOMB
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON BRIDGE,
THE LINCOLN TUNNEL, THE UNITED
NATIONS HEADQUARTERS, AND THE
NEW YORK F.B.I. BUILDING.
OMAR ABDEL-RAHMAN WAS 78 YEARS
OLD.
THE WOMAN KNOWN AS "JANE ROE,"
THE PLAINTIFF IN THE SUPREME
COURT'S 1973 "ROE VERSUS WADE"
CASE THAT ESTABLISHED A WOMAN'S
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO AN
ABORTION, HAS DIED.
JANE ROE'S REAL NAME WAS NORMA
McCORVEY.
SHE USED THE PSEUDONYM TO
PROTECT HER PRIVACY.
SHEDDING HER ANONYMITY YEARS
LATER, SHE BECAME AN ABORTION
RIGHTS ADVOCATE, BUT, IN 1995,
SHE DECLARED HERSELF A
BORN-AGAIN CHRISTIAN AND
OPPOSED ABORTION RIGHTS.
McCORVEY DIED TODAY OF A HEART
AILMENT IN KATY, TEXAS.
SHE WAS 69.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT OWNS ROUGHLY 640
MILLION ACRES, OR ABOUT 28% OF
THE LAND THAT FORMS THE U.S.
MOST OF THAT IS IN THE WESTERN
U.S. AND ALASKA, AND HELD FOR
PRESERVATION, RECREATION, AND
DEVELOPMENT OF NATURAL
RESOURCES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE LOOK AT HOW THAT LAND
OWNERSHIP EQUATION OCCASIONALLY
CREATES CONFLICTS BETWEEN STATES
AND WASHINGTON, D.C.
OUR FOCUS IS A SWATH OF LAND IN
NEVADA, ONE THAT PRESENTS THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION ANOTHER
AVENUE TO RE-EVALUATE THE OBAMA
LEGACY.
DEEP IN NEVADA'S MOJAVE DESERT,
100 MILES FROM THE LAS VEGAS
STRIP, THE ROCKS PROVIDE
GLIMPSES INTO THE LIVES OF
NATIVE AMERICANS WHO INHABITED
THIS AREA FOR THOUSANDS OF
YEARS.
HUNDREDS OF THEIR PETROGLYPHS,
OR ETCHINGS, ARE CARVED ON THE
ROCKS IN THIS AREA, NOW KNOWN AS
GOLD BUTTE.
>> THEY DATE THEM BY COMPARING
THEM TO OTHER PETROGLYPHS THAT
THEY'VE SEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: JAINA MOAN IS
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
FRIENDS OF GOLD BUTTE, A NON-
PROFIT ADVOCACY GROUP WORKING TO
PROTECT THIS STRETCH OF DESERT.
>> ON THIS PANEL HERE, YOU SEE
A LOT OF ABSTRACT SHAPES, SO,
HONEYCOMBS AND SQUIGGLY LINES.
AND THEN, IF YOU LOOK OVER HERE
ON THIS PANEL, YOU SEE MORE
REPRESENTATIONAL FORMS-- SO,
HUMANS, SHEEP.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE
PETROGLYPHS HAVE BEEN FOUND ALL
OVER THE WORLD AND IN OTHER
PARTS OF THE SOUTHWEST, THE
CONCENTRATION OF IMAGES-- AND
THIS DRAWING OF A MAN APPEARING
TO FALL-- HELP MAKE GOLD BUTTE
UNIQUE, ACCORDING TO JIM BOONE,
AN ECOLOGIST AND VOLUNTEER WITH
FRIENDS OF GOLD BUTTE.
>> I THINK OF THE ARTIST WHO DID
THIS AS PERHAPS THE MICHELANGELO
OF HIS DAY.
>> Sreenivasan: BOONE SAYS,
UNLIKE THE STICK FIGURES FOUND
NEARBY, THE "FALLING MAN"
PETROGLYPH IS MORE LIFELIKE.
>> IT HAS REAL MOTION TO IT,
AND THE ARM IS OUT AS IF TO
BRACE HIMSELF IN A FALL.
>> Sreenivasan: A DECADE OF
ADVOCACY BY FRIENDS OF GOLD
BUTTE, LOCAL NATIVE AMERICAN
TRIBES LIKE THE MOAPA BAND OF
PAIUTES, AND OTHER GROUPS PAID
OFF LAST DECEMBER WHEN
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA, IN ONE
HIS FINAL ACTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSERVANCY, USED HIS EXECUTIVE
POWER TO DESIGNATE GOLD BUTTE,
ITS PETROGLYPHS, ALONG WITH
300,000 SURROUNDING ACRES OF
LAND OWNED BY THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, AS A NATIONAL
MONUMENT.
THE PRESIDENT'S PROCLAMATION
CITED GOLD BUTTE'S ANCIENT
PETROGLYPHS AND ITS "VITAL
PLANT AND WILDLIFE HABITAT,
SIGNIFICANT GEOLOGICAL
FORMATIONS," AND REMNANTS OF
MINING AND RANCHING HERITAGE.
NESTLED BETWEEN LAKE MEAD IN THE
WEST AND THE GRAND CANYON
NATIONAL MONUMENT IN ARIZONA,
THE DESIGNATION OF GOLD BUTTE
PERMANENTLY LIMITS ANY
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT BUT
DOESN'T CHANGE EXISTING
RECREATIONAL USES.
>> IT'S ASSURED THAT WE ARE
GOING TO HAVE THIS LAND FOR OUR
ENJOYMENT AND FOR THE HEALTH OF
THE LANDSCAPE ITSELF, AND THE
PLANTS AND ANIMALS THAT LIVE
HERE.
THERE'S NO TIMELINE THAT ENDS
THIS PARTICULAR DESIGNATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SENIOR U.S.
SENATOR FROM NEVADA AT THE
TIME, DEMOCRATIC MINORITY LEADER
HARRY REID, HAD ENCOURAGED THE
PRESIDENT TO MAKE THE MOVE.
>> IS THIS WORTH PROTECTING?
IS THIS WORTH PRESERVING?
OF COURSE IT IS.
>> Sreenivasan: TO PROTECT GOLD
BUTTE, PRESIDENT OBAMA RELIED ON
A LAW FROM 1906 CALLED THE
ANTIQUITIES ACT, A LAW HE USED
34 TIMES DURING HIS TWO TERMS IN
OFFICE, DESIGNATING 553 MILLION
ACRES OF LAND AND SEA AS
NATIONAL MONUMENTS, THE MOST
EVER BY ANY PRESIDENT.
UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA-LAS VEGAS
LAW SCHOOL PROFESSOR BRET
BIRDSONG SERVED DURING OBAMA'S
SECOND TERM AS DEPUTY SOLICITOR
FOR LAND RESOURCES AT THE BUREAU
OF LAND MANAGEMENT, OR B.L.M.,
THE FEDERAL AGENCY TASKED WITH
MANAGING GOLD BUTTE.
>> PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT IN 1908
PROTECTED THE GRAND CANYON FOR
THE FIRST TIME-- BECAUSE IT WAS
UNDER THREAT OF MINERS WHO WERE
ESTABLISHING CLAIMS THERE--
USING THE ANTIQUITIES ACT AND
DIDN'T NEED TO GO THROUGH WHAT
CAN BE A VERY LONG AND LURCHING
LEGISLATIVE PROCESS.
AND THEN, AS WE'VE SEEN, THE
PUBLIC SUPPORT TENDS TO GROW
AROUND THOSE DESIGNATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: BIRDSONG SAYS
OBAMA TOOK ACTION AFTER THE
REPUBLICAN-LED CONGRESS FAILED
TO PASS LEGISLATION TO PROTECT
GOLD BUTTE DESPITE BROAD PUBLIC
SUPPORT.
A 2016 POLL FOUND 71% OF NEVADA
VOTERS SUPPORTED CREATING A
NATIONAL MONUMENT.
>> WHAT THE PRESIDENT WAS DOING
IS USING A LAWFUL POWER TO
PROVIDE THE BENEFITS AND THE
PROTECTION FOR THESE AREAS THAT
HE THOUGHT WERE WARRANTED
BECAUSE CONGRESS WAS REALLY
UNABLE TO ACT, DESPITE
SIGNIFICANT SUPPORT TO DO SO.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT THERE WAS--
AND STILL IS-- STRONG LOCAL
OPPOSITION TO THE NATIONAL
MONUMENT DESIGNATION, AND FEAR
IT WILL RESTRICT ACCESS TO THE
AREA.
>> IT ALL SOUNDS GREAT TO THE
PUBLIC OUT THERE.
WHAT THEY DON'T UNDERSTAND IS,
IT IS PUBLIC LANDS RIGHT NOW,
AND IT'S PUBLIC LANDS FOR THE
USE OF ME, MY CHILDREN, OTHER
PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: CRESENT HARDY
REPRESENTED THE GOLD BUTTE AREA
IN CONGRESS AND THE STATE
LEGISLATURE.
A REPUBLICAN, HARDY CALLS THE
DESIGNATION AN OVERREACH.
>> I THINK IF YOU WANT TO
PROTECT THE PETROGLYPHS AND YOU
WANT TO DESIGNATE THAT AS THE
MONUMENT, THAT'S WHAT THE
ANTIQUITIES ACT WAS SET UP TO
DO, IS PROTECT THE MINIMUM
POSSIBLE FOOTPRINT OF THAT OF
WHAT YOU'RE TRYING TO
DESIGNATE.
NOT AN EXTRA 300,000 ACRES ON
TOP OF THE 50-100 ACRES THAT YOU
COULD HAVE PROTECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TENSION OVER
CONTROL OF FEDERALLY-OWNED LAND
HAS SIMMERED SINCE MANY WESTERN
STATES WERE FORMED.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OWNS
ALMOST HALF OF THESE 11 WESTERN
STATES.
AND NO STATE HAS A GREATER
PERCENTAGE OF FEDERAL LAND THAN
NEVADA, WHICH IS 85% FEDERALLY
OWNED.
FORMER CONGRESSMAN HARDY WOULD
LIKE TO SEE STATES HAVE MUCH
MORE CONTROL OF THEIR OWN
MANAGEMENT.
>> GIVE US THE MONEY THAT YOU
SPEND OUT THERE ACROSS THE
COUNTRY ON EVERY STATE, AND LET
US MANAGE OUR LAND.
LET US DO OUR PLANNING PROCESSES
INSTEAD OF GOING TO THIS HEAVY
BUREAUCRACY THAT HAS TO-- WHERE
YOU DUPLICATE THE SAME THING
NEVADA DOES, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT DOES, AND TAKES
LONGER DOING IT.
>> Sreenivasan: CONFLICTS OVER
FEDERAL LAND HAVE ALSO BOILED
OVER IN THIS CORNER OF NEVADA
AND MADE NATIONAL NEWS.
>> Woodruff: ...WHERE A STANDOFF
BETWEEN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
AND A LOCAL CATTLE RANCHER,
INVOLVING AN ARMED MILITIA,
ALMOST TURNED VIOLENT.
>> Sreenivasan: JUST NORTH OF
GOLD BUTTE, RANCHER CLIVEN
BUNDY, HIS TWO SONS, AND
HUNDREDS OF THEIR SUPPORTERS
ENGAGED IN AN ARMED
CONFRONTATION WITH FEDERAL
OFFICIALS OVER CATTLE GRAZING
FEES IN 2014.
WHILE BUNDY AND HIS SONS ARE
FACING FEDERAL CHARGES OVER THE
INCIDENT, SINCE THE STAND-OFF,
THERE HAS BEEN ALMOST NO FEDERAL
PRESENCE IN THE AREA.
SINCE THEN, FRIENDS OF GOLD
BUTTE HAS WORKED TO DOCUMENT
EXISTING AND NEW DAMAGE,
INCLUDING ILLEGAL WATER TANKS
AND VANDALISM OF PETROGLYPHS,
EVEN A FEW BULLET HOLES.
>> WE DON'T WANT TO SEE THOSE
CONTINUING DEGRADING EFFECTS
IMPACT THE LAND AND ERASE ALL OF
THESE WONDERFUL TREASURES THAT
WE HAVE OUT HERE.
I MEAN, WHEN A PETROGLYPH IS
SHOT, THAT'S IT.
IT'S THERE FOREVER.
>> Sreenivasan: JIM BOONE SAYS
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES FREQUENTLY
DAMAGE HABITAT BY VEERING OFF
THE MORE-THAN-300 MILES OF
DESIGNATED TRAILS.
THESE FRESH TRACKS DURING OUR
VISIT MARKED WHERE A VEHICLE
DROVE AROUND A FENCE MEANT TO
PROTECT A PLANT SPECIES FOUND
ONLY IN THIS PART OF NEVADA.
>> SO EVERYBODY GETS THEIR PIECE
OF THE DESERT TO DO WHAT THEY
WANT, BUT PEOPLE CAN'T GO
EVERYWHERE AND DO EVERYTHING.
>> IF THERE AIN'T A ROAD; I
AIN'T GOING THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: BOB ADAMS IS THE
PRESIDENT OF A LOCAL ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLE CLUB.
HE'S RIDDEN THOUSANDS OF MILES
IN AND AROUND GOLD BUTTE IN HIS
"SIDE BY SIDE" A.T.V., AND SAYS
THE AREA IS GENERALLY RESPECTED
BY PEOPLE THAT USE IT.
>> IF YOU GOT A NETWORK OF ROADS
ALREADY THAT GOES TO THOSE
PLACES, WHY WOULD YOU WANT TO GO
OVER AND TRAVEL ON SOMETHING
LIKE THAT, JUST TO SAY YOU DID?
>> Sreenivasan: THE DESIGNATION
DOES NOT ROLL BACK DRIVING IN
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES, CAMPING,
HIKING, OR HUNTING, BUT ADAMS
WORRIES CONSERVATIONISTS WILL
EXPLOIT THE RARE ACTS OF
VANDALISM TO PUT FUTURE LIMITS
ON RECREATIONAL ACCESS.
>> WHY DID THEY FEEL THEY NEEDED
TO DESIGNATE IT AS A NATIONAL
MONUMENT?
UNLESS THEY THEN USE THAT TO,
YOU KNOW, PUT RESTRICTIONS ON IT
IN SOME WAY, SHAPE, OR FORM.
>> Sreenivasan: NATIVE AMERICAN
TRIBES LIKE THE MOAPA BAND OF
PAIUTES CONSIDER GOLD BUTTE TO
BE SACRED LAND, AND SEE THE
NATIONAL MONUMENT DECLARATION AS
AN IMPORTANT STEP TO PRESERVE
THEIR CULTURAL LEGACY.
WILLIAM ANDERSON IS THE TRIBE'S
FORMER CHAIRMAN.
>> EVERY ATTEMPT WE TRIED, TO GO
AHEAD AND PRESERVE THE LAND,
FAILED.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST APRIL, HE
HELPED ORGANIZE AN 11-MILE
"CULTURE WALK" THROUGH GOLD
BUTTE TO RAISE AWARENESS OF THE
DAMAGE TO PETROGLYPHS AND APPEAL
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA TO GRANT
MONUMENT STATUS TO THE AREA.
>> NOW THAT IT'S A NATIONAL
MONUMENT, WE'RE ABLE TO GO AHEAD
AND SHOW THEM HOW IMPORTANT IT
IS TO OUR PEOPLE, AND TO GO
AHEAD AND SEE WHAT ELSE WE COULD
DO TO PROVIDE MORE FUNDING.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR NOW, NO NEW
FEDERAL FUNDING COMES WITH
NATIONAL MONUMENT STATUS, AND
THE B.L.M. HAD A MAINTENANCE
BACKLOG OF ABOUT $600 MILLION IN
2016.
FORMER CONGRESSMAN HARDY WANTS
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION AND
CONGRESS TO REEXAMINE THE GOLD
BUTTE DECLARATION.
>> I WOULD SURE HOPE THAT THIS
ADMINISTRATION WOULD LOOK AT
THAT, SHRINKING THE SIZE, OR
LET'S DESIGNATE THE AREA THAT
NEEDS PROTECTING.
BUT ALMOST EVERY PRESIDENT
THAT'S GONE THROUGH HAS ABUSED
THE ANTIQUITIES ACT IN A MANNER
THAT'S WAY BEYOND PROTECTING
THAT WHICH IS DESIGNED FOR THE
ANTIQUITIES ACT.
SO I HOPE CONGRESS LOOKS AT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: PAST PRESIDENTS
HAVE ONLY AMENDED THE SIZE OF A
PREDECESSOR'S MONUMENT
DESIGNATION.
>> NO PRESIDENT HAS EVER TRIED
TO UNDO A NATIONAL MONUMENT
DESIGNATION.
THE ANTIQUITIES ACT SAYS THE
PRESIDENT HAS THE AUTHORITY TO
DESIGNATE NATIONAL MONUMENTS.
IT IS SILENT AS TO ANY
UN-DESIGNATION OF NATIONAL
MONUMENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN HIS
CONFIRMATION HEARINGS TO BECOME
INTERIOR SECRETARY, RYAN ZINKE
SAID HE'LL REVIEW THE GOLD BUTTE
DECISION, BUT NOT BEFORE
VISITING THE AREA HIMSELF.
B.L.M.'S LAS VEGAS FIELD
MANAGER, GAYLE MARRS-SMITH,
TELLS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
OFFICIALS HAVE STARTED OUTREACH
ON HOW THE MONUMENT WILL BE
MANAGED.
>> THIS PLAN IS TO BE DEVELOPED
WITH EXTENSIVE PUBLIC
PARTICIPATION.
WE WOULD WANT TO TAKE THEIR
INPUT, THEIR CONCERNS, AND BUILD
THAT INTO THE PLANNING PROCESS.
THE MORE THE MERRIER, AT THIS
POINT.
>> Sreenivasan: JIM BOONE, OF
FRIENDS OF GOLD BUTTE, IS
PARTICIPATING IN THE PROCESS,
AND PUSHING FOR THIS LAND TO BE
PROTECTED.
>> THERE'LL BE MORE PEOPLE.
THERE'LL PROBABLY BE MORE
DESIGNATED TRAILS.
THERE MIGHT BE SOME KIND OF
BARRIERS TO KEEP PEOPLE FROM
ACTUALLY WALKING UP AND TOUCHING
THE PETROGLYPHS.
BUT BY AND LARGE, THE LANDSCAPE,
THE GEOLOGY, THE BIG VIEWS, ALL
OF THAT STUFF IS GOING TO BE THE
SAME, VIRTUALLY FOREVER.
>> Sreenivasan: FACEBOOK C.E.O.
MARK ZUCKERBERG HAS LAID OUT HIS
VISION FOR THE SOCIAL NETWORK'S
FUTURE IN A NEARLY 6,000-WORD
MANIFESTO HE POSTED ON THURSDAY.
CALLED "BUILDING GLOBAL
COMMUNITY," ZUCKERBERG CALLED
FOR MORE CONNECTEDNESS TO
EMPOWER PEOPLE TO COMBAT SOCIAL
ILLS.
FOR MORE, I AM JOINED BY KARA
SWISHER, EXECUTIVE EDITOR OF THE
NEWS SITE RE/CODE, WHO SPOKE
WITH ZUCKERBERG ABOUT HIS ESSAY.
NOW, WORTH NOTING, THE SOCIAL
NETWORK HAS 1.8 BILLION PEOPLE,
A QUARTER OF THE PLANET.
BUT WHY IS IT A BIG DEAL?
THERE ARE SHAREHOLDER LETTERS
WRITTEN ALL THE TIME BY
COMPANIES.
>> WELL, HE DIDN'T WRITE IT TO
SHAREHOLDERS; HE WROTE IT TO
EMPLOYEES OF FACEBOOK, AND THAT
WAS AN INTERESTING THING.
AND I THINK HE WROTE IT FOR THE
GENERAL PUBLIC, TOO, IT WASN'T
FOR INVESTORS IN FACEBOOK,
CERTAINLY NOT FROM READING IT.
IT WASN'T ABOUT INVESTMENTS OR
ANYTHING ABOUT THEIR BUSINESS,
BUT MORE ABOUT THEIR SOUL, THE
SOUL OF THE COMPANY.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT SEEMS TO STRIKE OUT
IS THAT THERE'S THIS-- IN THE
INTEREST OF GLOBAL
CONNECTEDNESS, HE IS ALSO
SPEAKING AGAINST WHAT WE ARE
SEEING AS A NATIONALISM AND A
ISOLATIONISM.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
YEAH, I THINK IT'S INTERESTING.
HE'S TRYING VERY HARD TO THREAD
A VERY THIN NEEDLE.
HE DIDN'T USE THE WORD "TRUMP"
ANYWHERE; HE INSISTED THAT HE'D
WORKED ON THIS IDEA FOR YEARS.
BUT THERE WAS ONE LINE, I
THINK, IN THE THING, THAT SAID,
IT NEVER WAS A CONTROVERSIAL
THING, THAT CONNECTION, GLOBAL
CONNECTION WAS CONTROVERSIAL,
ESSENTIALLY.
THAT'S WHAT HE WAS SAYING.
AND SO, BY SAYING THAT, YOU ARE
SAYING, WHY IS CONNECTION
CONTROVERSIAL?
AND THAT WAS THE BEGINNING OF
THE ESSAY, AND IT WENT ON FOR A
LONG, LONG TIME, ON LOTS OF
ISSUES AROUND SAFETY, EVERYTHING
FROM BULLYING TO FAKE NEWS, TO
HOW FACEBOOK IS GOING TO LET
PEOPLE HANDLE THEIR PROFILES
GOING FORWARD, TO SORT OF AN
EMBRACE OF GLOBALISM.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE FAKE
NEWS PART, I MEAN, WE IN THIS
BUSINESS CARE A LOT ABOUT IT,
BUILDING A MORE INFORMED WORLD.
HIS FIRST RESPONSE TO THE
ALLEGATIONS OF THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF FACEBOOK IN
ALL THIS WAS, "WHAT?
NO, WE DIDN'T DO ANY OF THIS."
>> YES, I CALL IT THE "WHAT IF"
SHRUG.
>> Sreenivasan: YEAH, AND NOW IT
SEEMS TO HAVE SHIFTED.
AT LEAST HE WANTS TO BE PART OF
THE PROBLEM, WHICH MEANS HE'S
SORT OF IMPLYING HE WAS PART OF
THE PROBLEM IN THE FIRST PLACE.
>> YEAH, EXACTLY, SO HE--
YOU KNOW, I THINK IN THE
BEGINNING HE WAS ASKED ABOUT IT,
AND HE SHRUGGED IT OFF THAT IT
WASN'T A BIG DEAL, EXCEPT THAT
EVERY INDICATION IS THAT MOST
PEOPLE GET THEIR NEWS FROM
FACEBOOK.
SO EVEN IF HE DOESN'T SEE
HIMSELF AS A MEDIA COMPANY,
DOESN'T SEE FACEBOOK AS A MEDIA
COMPANY, IT IS.
IT'S A MEDIA DISTRIBUTION
COMPANY, FOR SURE.
I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE REACTED
TO THAT BADLY AND SAID, WAIT A
MINUTE.
LIKE, EVERYBODY GETS THEIR NEWS,
AND SOME OF THIS NEWS IS FAKE.
AND DON'T YOU HAVE A
RESPONSIBILITY TO HAVE SOME
CONTROL OVER YOUR PLATFORM OR DO
YOU JUST WANT IT TO BE THIS
TOXIC WASTE DUMP THAT IT'S
BECOMING, SORT OF LIKE TWITTER.
YOU KNOW, TWITTER IS SORT OF A
FREE-FOR-ALL, AND I THINK MARK
IS LOOKING TO GET SOMEWHERE IN
BETWEEN, NOT TAKE FULL
RESPONSIBILITY, BUT LEAST
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THERE ARE SOME
IMPLICATIONS OF WHAT FACEBOOK
DOES.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THIS, HE'S
TRYING TO ALMOST BUILD THIS
CONNECTIVE TISSUE, A LAYER OF
INFRASTRUCTURE BETWEEN OTHER
LAYERS OF INFRASTRUCTURE,
BETWEEN-- IT'S THE SORT OF THING
THAT WOULD BE BETWEEN OUR CHURCH
AND OUR SCHOOL AND EVERYTHING
ELSE WOULD BE ON FACEBOOK WHICH,
OF COURSE, IS GOOD FOR BUSINESS.
>> SURE, ABSOLUTELY.
OH, NO, YOU KNOW, THE FUNNIEST
HEADLINE I HAS WAS, MARK
ZUCKERBERG'S SOLUTION FOR THE
WORLD CRISIS IS MORE FACEBOOK,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
THAT IF WE COULD ONLY FACEBOOK
TOGETHER WE WOULD ALL GET ALONG
AND HAVE COMMON GROUND.
AND HE TALKED ABOUT THIS IDEA OF
POLARIZATION.
EVEN WITHIN THE FACEBOOK
SYSTEM,IS THAT YOU HANG-- THE
FILTER BUBBLES, THAT YOU HANG
WITH YOUR FRIENDS AND FAMILY AND
ONLY PEOPLE LIKE-MINDED AND YOU
DON'T GET OUT AND SEE OTHER
PEOPLE, AND I THINK THAT WAS AN
INTERESTING PART-- IS, HOW CAN
WE CONNECT YOU WITH MORE POINTS
OF VIEW?
HOW CAN WE CONNECT YOU WITH
DIFFERENT PEOPLE AND HOW CAN WE
GIVE YOU A WIDER VIEWPOINT FROM
YOUR WORLD, WHICH I THINK WAS
DIFFERENT, BECAUSE FACEBOOK HAS
BEEN ORGANICALLY FRIENDS, FAMILY
AND, SOME INTERESTS BUT,
LARGELY, FRIENDS AND FAMILY AND
PEOPLE LIKE YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: KARA SWISHER,
FROM RE/CODE, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS A LOT.
>> Sreenivasan: READ ABOUT THE
ARCHITECTURAL CHALLENGES OF
DESIGNING A COHOUSING COMMUNITY.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: ON TOMORROW'S
PROGRAM, JEFF GREENFIELD REPORTS
ON NEW DEMOCRATS WHO SAY THEY
HAVE A PLAN FOR THEIR PARTY TO
RECONNECT WITH WORKING CLASS
VOTERS.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.